.TH VEX 1 "2026-04-09" "Vex" "User Commands"
.SH NAME
vex \- a structured data shell
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B vex
.RB [ \-l | \-\-login ]
.RB [ \-c
.IR command ]
.RB [ \-v | \-\-version ]
.RB [ \-h | \-\-help ]
.RI [ script
.RI [ args... ]]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B Vex
is a modern shell that combines structured data pipelines with traditional
shell features.
It supports typed values (strings, integers, floats, booleans, lists,
records, closures), first-class functions, and built-in format parsers.
.PP
When invoked without arguments,
.B vex
starts an interactive session with line editing, syntax highlighting,
autosuggestion, and tab completion.
When given a
.I script
argument, it executes the file non-interactively.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.BI \-c " command"
Execute
.I command
as a string and exit.
.TP
.BR \-l ", " \-\-login
Start as a login shell, sourcing system and user login configuration files.
.TP
.BR \-v ", " \-\-version
Print the version number and exit.
.TP
.BR \-h ", " \-\-help
Print a brief usage summary and exit.
.TP
.IR script " [" args... ]
Run the given script file.
Arguments are accessible within the script as
.BR $0 ", " $1 ", ..., "
.BR $argv " (list of all arguments), and"
.BR $argc " (argument count)."
Scripts starting with
.B ./
or
.B /
are executed directly.
.SH SYNTAX
.SS Variables
.nf
\fBlet\fR x = 5
\fBmut\fR y = 10
echo $x
.fi
.SS Strings
.nf
"hello $name"        # interpolated string
\(aqraw string\(aq         # literal string
.fi
.SS Lists
.nf
[1, 2, 3]
.fi
.SS Records
.nf
{name: "vex", version: 1}
.fi
.SS Closures
.nf
{|x| $x * 2}
.fi
.SS Pipes
.nf
data | filter | transform      # structured data pipe
cmd |> cmd                     # byte stream pipe
.fi
.SS Ranges
.nf
1..10                # inclusive range
1..<10               # exclusive range
.fi
.SS Control Flow
.nf
\fBif\fR condition { ... } \fBelse\fR { ... }
\fBfor\fR x \fBin\fR $list { ... }
\fBwhile\fR condition { ... }
\fBloop\fR { ... }
\fBmatch\fR $val { pattern => action, ... }
\fBtry\fR { ... } \fBcatch\fR { |err| ... }
.fi
.SS Functions
.nf
\fBfn\fR name [params] { body }
.fi
.SS Operators
Arithmetic:
.BR + ", " \- ", " * ", " / ", " %
.br
Comparison:
.BR == ", " != ", " < ", " > ", " <= ", " >=
.br
Logical:
.BR and ", " or ", " not
.br
Regex match:
.B =~
.br
Error propagation:
.B ?
.SS External Commands
.nf
^command             # explicit external invocation
./script.sh          # relative path execution
/path/to/cmd         # absolute path execution
command              # resolved after builtins/functions
.fi
.SS Redirections
.nf
cmd > file           # stdout to file
cmd >> file          # stdout append
cmd 2> file          # stderr to file
cmd 2>> file         # stderr append
cmd < file           # stdin from file
cmd <<< "string"     # here-string
cmd 2>&1             # stderr to stdout
cmd <<EOF            # heredoc
\&...
EOF
.fi
.SS Background Execution
.nf
command &
.fi
.SS Conditional Chains
.nf
cmd1 && cmd2 || cmd3
.fi
.SH ALIASES
Aliases map a name to a command string.
Both syntaxes are supported:
.nf
alias ll = ls -la
alias ll ls -la
.fi
.PP
Alias values can contain
.BR && ", " || ", and " |
operators:
.nf
alias update = paru -Syu --noconfirm && fastfetch
.fi
.PP
List all aliases:
.nf
alias
.fi
.SH UNDO
.B Vex
tracks destructive file operations and allows undoing them.
.TP
.B undo
Reverse the last
.BR rm ", " mv ", or " cp
operation.
Files deleted with
.B rm
are moved to
.I ~/.local/share/vex/trash/
instead of being permanently deleted.
.TP
.B undo-list
List recent undoable operations with timestamps.
.PP
Multi-file operations are grouped:
.B rm a.txt b.txt
followed by
.B undo
restores both files.
.SH COMMAND PREVIEW
When typing destructive commands
.RB ( rm ", " mv ", " cp ),
an inline preview appears below the prompt showing what the command will do:
.nf
~ vex> rm *.log
  trash: app.log, error.log (2 files, 1.5 KB)
.fi
.SH DIRECTORY NAVIGATION
.TP
.B cd
Change directory.
Falls back to frecency-based jumping if the path doesn't exist:
.nf
cd vex            # jumps to ~/dev/ideas/vex via frecency
cd ..             # relative path
cd ~/Downloads    # absolute path
.fi
.TP
.B j
Frecency jump to a directory by fuzzy match.
.TP
.B ji
Interactive frecency directory picker.
.SH WATCH
.TP
.BI "watch " "interval command"
Re-run a command periodically with live-updating table output and diff highlighting.
.nf
watch 1 "ps | select pid name status | first 10"
watch 2s "df"
watch 500ms "date"
.fi
.PP
Changed values are highlighted in yellow between refreshes.
Press
.B Ctrl-C
to exit.
.SH LINE EDITING
.B Vex
provides interactive line editing with two modes: Emacs (default) and Vi.
.SS Emacs Mode (default)
.TP
.B Ctrl\-A / Ctrl\-E
Move to beginning / end of line.
.TP
.B Ctrl\-K
Kill text from cursor to end of line.
.TP
.B Ctrl\-U
Kill text from cursor to beginning of line.
.TP
.B Ctrl\-W
Kill word backward.
.TP
.B Ctrl\-Y
Yank from kill ring.
.TP
.B Ctrl\-R
Reverse incremental history search.
.TP
.B Ctrl\-L
Clear screen.
.TP
.B Ctrl\-X Ctrl\-E
Open current line in
.BR $EDITOR .
.TP
.B Tab
Trigger completion.
Cycles inline with
.BR (N/M) " indicator."
.TP
.B Shift\-Tab
Reverse cycle through completions.
.TP
.B Right arrow (at end of line)
Accept autosuggestion.
.TP
.B Ctrl\-Right
Accept one word from autosuggestion.
.SS Vi Mode
Activate by setting
.BR VEX_EDIT_MODE =vi.
.PP
Supports
.BR i / a / A / I
(insert),
.BR h / l / w / b / e / 0 / $
(movement),
.BR x / dd / dw / d$
(delete),
.BR cc / cw / c$ / C / S
(change),
.BR u
(undo),
.BR p / P
(paste),
.BR yy / yw / y$
(yank),
.BR f / F / t / T
(find character),
.B /
(search history).
.SH TAB COMPLETION
.B Vex
provides context-aware tab completion:
.IP \(bu 2
Commands: builtins, aliases, PATH executables, local files/directories
.IP \(bu 2
Files and directories with case-insensitive matching
.IP \(bu 2
Pre-registered completions for 100+ commands (git, docker, cargo, etc.)
.IP \(bu 2
Auto-generated flag completions from
.B \-\-help
output on first use
.IP \(bu 2
Flags shown only when prefix starts with
.B \-
.SH BUILTINS
.B Vex
includes over 400 built-in commands.
Use
.B help
for documentation on a specific builtin:
.nf
help each
help str split
.fi
.PP
Use
.B builtins
to list all available builtins.
.SH PROMPT CUSTOMIZATION
.SS Format Specifiers
Set
.B VEX_PROMPT
or
.B VEX_RPROMPT
using these specifiers:
.TP
.B %d
Current working directory (full path).
.TP
.B %D
Basename of current working directory.
.TP
.B %g
Current Git branch name.
.TP
.B %G
Git status indicators (+staged *unstaged ?untracked).
.TP
.B %t
Current time (HH:MM).
.TP
.B %T
Current time (HH:MM:SS).
.TP
.B %E
Last command duration.
.TP
.B %j
Background job count.
.TP
.B %n
Username.
.TP
.B %h
Hostname.
.TP
.B %e
Last exit code (if non-zero).
.TP
.B %v
Vi mode indicator (INSERT/NORMAL).
.TP
.B %#
.B $
for normal users,
.B #
for root.
.TP
.BR %{ \fIstyle\fR }
ANSI style, e.g.\&
.BR %{bold,blue} ", " %{reset} ", " %{fg:196} ", " %{#ff5500} .
.SS Prompt Closures
.nf
prompt-fn {|| "my prompt> "}
rprompt-fn {|| $"(date now | format)"}
.fi
.SH HOOKS
.TP
.B preexec
Runs before each command.
.TP
.B precmd
Runs before each prompt.
.TP
.B chpwd
Runs when the working directory changes.
.PP
.nf
hook-add preexec {|cmd| log $cmd}
hook-add precmd {|| refresh-status}
hook-add chpwd {|| ls}
.fi
.SH ABBREVIATIONS
.nf
abbr add gs git status
abbr remove gs
abbr list
.fi
.SH COMPLETIONS
.nf
complete myapp -w "word1 word2"
complete-fn "myapp" {|prefix| myapp --completions $prefix | lines}
.fi
.SH CONFIGURATION
.SS Auto-Reload
The configuration file
.I ~/.config/vex/config.vex
is automatically reloaded when modified.
No restart or
.B source
command is needed.
.SS Syntax Colors
Colors can be set as ANSI SGR codes, hex colors, or 256-color codes:
.nf
export VEX_COLOR_BUILTIN "#89b4fa"
export VEX_COLOR_COMMAND "#a6e3a1"
export VEX_COLOR_STRING "#a6e3a1"
export VEX_COLOR_KEYWORD "#cba6f7"
export VEX_COLOR_NUMBER "#f9e2af"
export VEX_COLOR_OPERATOR "#9399b2"
export VEX_COLOR_COMMENT "#6c7086"
export VEX_COLOR_VARIABLE "#89dceb"
export VEX_COLOR_ERROR "#f38ba8"
export VEX_COLOR_PIPE "#74c7ec"
export VEX_COLOR_BOOL "#fab387"
.fi
.SH PLUGINS
Plugins are C shared libraries that extend vex with new commands.
.SS Loading
.nf
use plugin "path/to/plugin.so"
.fi
.SS Autoloading
Plugins in
.I ~/.config/vex/plugins/
are loaded automatically on startup.
Each plugin is a subdirectory containing an
.I init.vex
file:
.nf
~/.config/vex/plugins/myplugin/init.vex
.fi
.SS Writing Plugins
Plugins implement a
.B vex_plugin_init
function receiving a
.B VexPluginAPI
pointer (v5).
The API provides value creation, shell interaction, command registration,
completion registration, alias registration, environment access,
and command execution.
.PP
Build with:
.nf
cc -shared -fPIC -o plugin.so plugin.c
.fi
.SS Themes Plugin
An example themes plugin is included at
.IR examples/plugins/themes_plugin.c .
It provides
.B theme-list
and
.B theme-apply
commands with 7 built-in color schemes:
catppuccin, gruvbox, tokyonight, dracula, nord, solarized, rosepine.
.SH SHELL OPTIONS
.TP
.BR "set \-e" " / " "set \-o errexit"
Exit on non-zero status.
.TP
.BR "set \-x" " / " "set \-o xtrace"
Print each command before execution.
.TP
.BR "set \-u" " / " "set \-o nounset"
Error on undefined variables.
.TP
.B set \-o noclobber
Prevent
.B >
from overwriting files.
.SH ENVIRONMENT VARIABLES
.TP
.B VEX_PROMPT
Prompt format string.
.TP
.B VEX_RPROMPT
Right-side prompt format string.
.TP
.B VEX_EDIT_MODE
Line editing mode:
.B emacs
(default) or
.BR vi .
.TP
.B VEX_HISTSIZE
Maximum history entries (default 1000).
.TP
.B VEX_COLOR_*
Syntax highlighting colors (ANSI SGR, hex #rrggbb, or 256-color).
.SH FILES
.TP
.I /etc/vex/config.vex
System-wide configuration.
.TP
.I /etc/vex/profile.vex
System-wide login configuration.
.TP
.I ~/.config/vex/config.vex
Per-user configuration (auto-reloaded on change).
.TP
.I ~/.config/vex/profile.vex
Per-user login configuration.
.TP
.I ~/.config/vex/history
Command history (only successful commands saved).
.TP
.I ~/.config/vex/plugins/
Plugin autoload directory.
.TP
.I ~/.config/vex/themes/
User theme files.
.TP
.I ~/.local/share/vex/trash/
Trash directory for undoable
.B rm
operations.
.SH EXIT STATUS
.B Vex
returns the exit status of the last command executed, or the code passed to
.BR exit .
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR bash (1),
.BR zsh (1),
.BR fish (1),
.BR nu (1)
.SH AUTHORS
aethstetic
